JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Hundreds flee amid flooding,
heavy rains and
winds in Northern California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
Editors from newspapers in the
middle of America
share their readers' thoughts on
President
Trump's first month in office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Miles O'Brien
guides us
through NASA's latest discovery
of another
solar system with Earth-like
planets.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the hunt for
potential alien
life, the thought of finding
places where
there is liquid water is what
really intrigues
scientists.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A Jewish cemetery
near Saint
Louis, Missouri, won an
outpouring of support
today from Vice President Pence
on down.
More than 150 tombstones had
been toppled
or damaged over the weekend,
part of a spate
of anti-Semitic attacks and
threats nationwide.
The vice president visited
suburban Saint
Louis this afternoon, and made a
stop at the
cemetery.
He got a firsthand look at some
of the damage
and briefly joined the cleanup.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
There is no place in America for
hatred or
acts of prejudice or violence or
anti-Semitism.
I must tell you, the people of
Missouri are
inspiring the nation by your
love and care
for this place, for the Jewish
community in
Missouri, and I want to thank
you for that
inspiration, for showing the
world what America
is really all about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online
fund-raising has brought
in more than $92,000 to repair
the damage
at the cemetery.
Muslim groups launched the
effort in a show
of solidarity.
In Germany, the government is
making it easier
to deport rejected
asylum-seekers.
Germany took in nearly 900,000
people in 2015.
Today, Chancellor Angela
Merkel's Cabinet
approved a plan that speeds up
expulsions
of those who don't gain asylum.
Merkel's coalition has come
under increasing
domestic criticism over the tide
of migrants,
and it faces a general election
in September.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
Nations warned
today that nearly 20 million
people face starvation
in four countries, if help
doesn't arrive
before April.
The secretary-general said South
Sudan, Nigeria,
Somalia and Yemen are on the
brink of catastrophe,
and he called for $4.4 billion.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News reports on South Sudan,
where civil war
has brought on disaster.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Parts of South
Sudan are
in famine, the world's first
since 2011, over
a quarter of a million severely
malnourished
children, says UNICEF, almost
three million
forced from their homes because
of ethnic
conflict here, massacres and
widespread rape
as weapons of war.
And all the aid agencies admit
that this famine
is manmade.
Those men are Salva Kiir, the
president, wearing
the hat, and Riek Machar, his
former deputy.
Listen to this former minister
on how South
Sudan's leaders outsource
starvation as an
issue for us, rather than them.
GRANT SHAPPS, Former Minister of
State: I
met one of the finance ministers
for South
Sudan at the U.N. in New York,
and I said,
look, if this war continues, you
are going
to find your people are
starving, because
you're diverting all these
resources.
He said, you will feed the
people.
I said, what do you mean, we
will feed the
people?
He said, I don't believe that
countries like
Britain will walk away whilst
hundreds of
thousands of people starve, so
we will carry
on fighting the war.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: But confronted
with this
suffering, doing nothing is not
an option,
and for those arguing that aid
needs to be
tied to political reform, what
an appalling
example South Sudan is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, federal
officials shut down a protest
camp close to
the Dakota Access oil pipeline.
About 150 people left
voluntarily, but others
were arrested.
Earlier, protesters torched
their tents and
teepees near the Standing Rock
Sioux reservation
in North Dakota, in what they
called a ceremonial
act.
The Army Corps of Engineers
ordered the site
closed before spring floods.
Other protest camps have sprung
up on private
land as construction resumes on
the last stretch
of the pipeline.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Trump
administration
is moving tonight to revoke
guidelines on
transgender bathrooms in public
schools.
They were issued under President
Obama, and
called for letting students
choose a bathroom
based on gender identity.
Administration officials say Mr.
Trump is
acting because he believes
states should set
their own policies; 13 states
sued to block
the guidelines last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The organization
that oversees
the SAT college entrance exam is
beefing up
security after a rash of
cheating.
The College Board announced
today that it
will cut back testing dates
overseas to reduce
opportunities for stealing the
exams.
It's also increasing the numbers
of audits
at sites where the SAT is
administered.
The changes follow high-profile
cases in Asia
where students obtained copies
of tests in
advance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Wall
Street had a mixed
day, after oil prices slipped
and took energy
stocks lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 32
points to close at 20775.
The Nasdaq fell five points, and
the S&P 500
slipped two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
California braces for flooding
after years
of drought; newspaper editors
from the heartland
share their readers' views on
the early days
of the Trump presidency; Syrian
refugees who
would prefer not to move to the
U.S.; and
much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's turn our
focus out
West to Northern California,
where rain and
flooding have wreaked havoc on a
once-drought-stricken
region.
Officials in San Jose ordered
some 14,000
people to evacuate overnight.
Floodwaters did stabilize today,
but neighborhoods
were inundated.
Officials said they don't yet
know when residents
will be able to return to their
homes.
We're now joined by the mayor of
San Jose,
Sam Liccardo.
Mayor Liccardo, I just want to
ask.
You have got 14,000 out for
sure, another
20,000 encouraged to leave.
All of them want this
information that you
can't give them yet, which is,
when will they
be able to go back home?
®MD-BO /SAM LICCARDO, Mayor of
San Jose,
California: Yes, the important
message is
that we're not out of this yet.
Although the waters are
receding, we know
we have got other storms that
are coming in.
And it's not safe to go in many
of these neighborhoods
yet.
We have got a lot of very
contaminated water.
And we don't want folks going in
there if
they're going to be in peril.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Do you have
any estimate
on how significant the damage
is?
SAM LICCARDO: Not yet.
Right now, we're really just
focused on making
sure we're taking care of the
families and
their immediate needs.
We are going to have an
opportunity to get
building inspectors in there to
really look
at the housing and make sure
it's safe.
And we will have a better sense
in the days
to come.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But why did it
take so long
to evacuate these folks?
We were reporting on this in the
East Coast.
People knew that this storm was
coming.
You knew.
You had the weather forecast.
Yet now we see reports that it
was late last
night where the police were
pounding on doors
and saying, hey, come on, it's
too late, you
have got to move.
SAM LICCARDO: Yes, it's fair to
say we were
preparing for a storm, but what
really flooded
these neighborhoods was the
overpouring of
a dam, Anderson Dam, which
released a torrent
of water that exceeded our
100-year flood
estimate.
Essentially, the flood maps, the
data that
we were relying on wasn't
preparing us for
this.
And so we are clearly learning
some very hard
lessons here, and we have got a
lot to fix
going forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Anderson Dam,
which feeds
that Coyote Creek area, some
engineers say
it could take nine weeks for
them to bring
it down to the safe levels at 68
percent,
or whatever the capacity is of
the reservoir.
And right now, it's up at 100.
So, is there going to be a huge
volume of
water that floods through this
creek and basically
keeps this the status quo in San
Jose and
parts of other neighborhoods
here?
SAM LICCARDO: Well, much depends
on the rains
that are to come.
We're expecting another storm
this weekend.
And we hope that obviously it
won't be substantial,
because we need to get some sun
on this reservoir
to get some of that water
evaporated.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Has the city
requested any
sort of aid from the state or
the federal
government?
SAM LICCARDO: I had a
conversation with the
governor's office just a couple
of hours ago.
We're working with them
collaboratively.
So far, we have been able to
manage this on
our own, really incredible work
by a lot of
firefighters, first-responders
who are working
many overtime shifts to safely
evacuate hundreds
of residents by boat, really a
great testament
to their hard work.
But we know we're probably going
to need help
in the weeks to come.
And we're working now with the
state to figure
out how we can do that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How many
people do you still
have in emergency shelters?
And is that number decreasing?
SAM LICCARDO: We have more than
300 in shelters
right now.
The good news is really the
overwhelming majority
of the displaced residents were
able to find
help with friends or family
members nearby.
So we're going to do everything
we can to
help folks who are displaced and
see how we
can help them get back on their
feet.
What's been a remarkable thing
is to see how
the community has reached out in
various ways
to help these families.
Volunteers, a lot of
contributions and donations
we're seeing pouring in now.
It's a real testament to how
this community
is pulling together in tough
times.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there
anything else that
the city of San Jose needs?
SAM LICCARDO: Well, certainly,
we appreciate
any contributions through our
local community
foundation to help these
families get back
on their feet.
But, more than anything, beyond
a big bottle
of Drano, we could use some sun.
And we have got some sun today.
And we hope that the good
weather will persist
as long as possible.
It's an odd thing to ask for in
California,
because we get 300 days of sun a
year.
And we have just endured years
of drought.
But we need more sun.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
All right, Mayor Sam Liccardo of
San Jose,
thanks so much.
SAM LICCARDO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now that we're
one month into
the Trump administration, we
wanted to get
a sense of how different parts
of the country
are assessing the president's
time in office.
To do that, we have asked
newspaper editors
from three states to tell us
what they're
hearing from readers in their
communities.
And they join us now.
Lee Ann Colacioppo is the editor
of The Denver
Post.
David Haynes is the editorial
page editor
for The Milwaukee
Journal-Sentinel in Wisconsin.
And David Bradley is the editor
of The St.
Joseph News-Press in Missouri.
And we welcome all of you to the
"NewsHour."
David Bradley, I'm going to
start with you.
Missouri is a state that went
heavily for
Donald Trump.
He won by something like 20
points.
What are you hearing right now
from your readers
about how he's doing?
DAVID BRADLEY, Editor, St.
Joseph News-Press:
I think people are fairly well
satisfied with
what Donald Trump is doing now.
I think he's done a lot of
things that he
said he would do.
He's made a few misstatements
over the last
few weeks, but what he's done, I
think, has
been pretty impressive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lee Ann
Colacioppo, what about
your readers in Denver around
Colorado?
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO, Editor, The
Denver Post:
We're getting a lot of really
mixed results,
mixed phone calls.
We have got people calling up
really upset,
angry with the Trump
administration, angry
with us when we have
editorialized in the
vein of he's lying.
And then we have got a lot of
people who are
-- so we're really hearing from
both sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK, we are going
to pursue
that.
David Haynes, what about in
Milwaukee?
What are you picking up from
your readers?
DAVID HAYNES, Editorial Page
Editor, The Milwaukee
Journal-Sentinel: Well, Judy, it
always depends
on who you talk to.
Liberals in our state don't have
much use
of Donald Trump.
Independents are a little bit
divided, although
they are concerned about what
has been reported
as some of the chaos in the
White House.
Conservatives in Wisconsin
didn't support
Donald Trump in the primary.
They went for Ted Cruz, and so
they're still
a little wary and worried that
the agenda
of Paul Ryan, who is from our
state, may not
get passed in the way they'd
like.
But what I hear from Trump
supporters, mostly,
is you in the media need to let
him get his
administration organized.
And I often hear them saying
that, you know,
Bill Clinton didn't exactly have
an easy transition
either, but, in the same breath,
they often
will say, but, gosh, I wish he
would stop
tweeting at 3:00 in the morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what about
that, David
Bradley, in Saint Joseph,
Missouri?
You mentioned a few
misstatements, but is
that just a small part of what
you're hearing?
What are people saying about the
tweets and
the other -- some of the
controversial statements
he's made?
DAVID BRADLEY: I think people
really are getting
turned off by all the protests
and all the
antagonism going on.
And I think they would just like
people to
sit back, relax, let him try to
run the country
and work with Congress and try
to get some
things done that he said.
You know, he's done 24 executive
orders.
He's done -- he's appointed a
Supreme Court
justice for the Congress to
approve.
He has met with several foreign
leaders, four
foreign leaders.
He has talked with a lot of
business leaders
and labor leaders in this
country, and he's
gotten the pipelines opened up
so they can
finish the pipelines.
He's done quite a few things,
appointed 15
members of the Cabinets.
I know it's been delayed, but
he's trying
to get those through.
So he's done a lot of things, I
think, that
are going in the right
direction.
He's made a mistake, I think, on
his order
on the immigration from those
seven countries.
He's correcting that now.
And I think he's doing
everything he can to
try to keep the country safe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lee Ann
Colacioppo in Denver,
again, are you hearing some of
those same
sentiments where you are?
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO: I would say
that we are
probably hearing more people who
are concerned
about the direction of the
administration.
We are getting a lot of
protests, it seems
like almost every day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should say
that Colorado
is a state that Hillary Clinton
won by about
five points.
So, let me come back to you,
David Haynes,
in Wisconsin.
You were saying there's a
mixture of reactions
to the president there.
What about on the immigration
order, the tightening
announced this week and then the
seven-country
travel ban?
DAVID HAYNES: Well, immigration,
as in many
states, is an issue that cuts
both ways.
We have a large population of
recent immigrants
in the Milwaukee area, mostly
from Mexico.
There was a big Day Without
Latinos rally
here.
But when you get out into the
state, out into
the rural areas, where Donald
Trump won by
large margins, he won our state
by about 10,000
votes, small margin overall, but
he piled
up votes in the rural areas.
In those areas, that's also
where dairy farming
is in Wisconsin.
And dairy farms in Wisconsin
employ -- about
40 percent of their hired hands
are immigrants,
many of them undocumented.
And so you have a situation in
that area of
the state where you have
neighbors who -- maybe
a farmer who has undocumented
immigrants working
for him, and down the road a
neighbor who
went a Trump rally and was
chanting don't
build the wall, so it's quite a
dichotomy
here on that issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Bradley, in
Missouri,
where you are, again, as we
said, Saint Joseph's,
how much of an issue is
immigration and the
president's attempt to tighten
enforcement
of the immigration laws
resonating there?
DAVID BRADLEY: I don't think
people are against
immigration in our part of the
world.
I think they would like to see
it done legally,
and they would like to go
through the regular
legal channels.
We have a lot of immigrants
working in our
beef-packing or pork-packing
houses in Missouri,
and a lot of them are great
workers.
But we would like to see them go
through legal
channels.
And, really, the main concern of
people in
our area, they want more and
better jobs.
They want a more pro-business
environment
and not have so many
regulations, so we can
grow the number of jobs and good
jobs in our
community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lee Ann
Colacioppo in Denver,
how much are you hearing from
people about
that, about, you know, kind of
like what David
Bradley said a minute ago, that
some people
just want the president to get
on with it
and start to do something about
creating jobs?
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO: You know, I
don't -- it
seems like, from the job
creation standpoint,
that is not one of the subjects
that we are
hearing a whole lot about.
I think we're hearing more about
concerns
about the health -- health
insurance has been
big in the discussion.
Immigration has been big.
But I haven't heard as much from
people discussing
the economy.
I have heard -- the bigger part
has been wishing
that so much of the kind of
national talk
hasn't -- wasn't drifting into,
say, state
legislature and city councils
and other parts
of the political spectrum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you mean?
You mean that they think more
should be done
in Washington or less?
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO: More that
the nastiness
of the national debate has
worked its way
into legislative bodies here
that are usually
more civil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, David
Haynes -- I'm sorry.
I didn't mean to interrupt you.
But, David Haynes in Milwaukee,
is there a
sense there that the national
debate has gotten
rougher in the last couple of
months?
DAVID HAYNES: Well, it's been
going on in
Wisconsin for six years.
We have had -- we're one of the
most polarized
states in the country.
But I don't think there is any
question that
the national debate is more
fractured and
tougher.
Our newspaper, in fact, just
hosted last night
a community conversation, first
of several
we're going to do, in which
we're trying to
bring people together face to
face across
that divide and talk about it.
But it's a tough -- it's a tough
thing to
do, because we have kind of
retreated to our
echo chambers.
And there is a great deal of
tribalism in
terms of people are kind of
locked in and
-- into positions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Bradley,
back to you
in Missouri.
What would you say -- finally, I
want to ask
all three of you, what are
people that you're
hearing from most wanting to see
from this
president?
DAVID BRADLEY: I think people in
our area
would like to see a better form
of taxation
that's pro-growth, that helps us
grow our
companies and grow our jobs in
our area.
I think people will like to see
less regulations,
hopefully, that bog down
businesses from growing
and adding more jobs and good
jobs.
And I think they would like to
see a better
sense of communication between
all sides,
so they can talk to each other
in a civil
manner and get together and work
together,
not just antagonize each other
and just wind
up trying to delay everything.
And there is an attitude that
anything he
does is not right today, and
that kind of
attitude is not going to work if
you're trying
to work with a president and a
legislature
to work together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are they putting
the blame
-- just quickly, David Bradley,
so are they
putting the blame on Republicans
or Democrats
or everybody?
DAVID BRADLEY: I think both
sides are pointing
at each other.
And I think they wound up -- I
think there
is a way to get together and
talk and hopefully
try to work things out.
And I don't think Trump is
willing -- is determined
to get everything he wants, and
I don't think
the Congress is going to get
everything they
want.
But there has got to be some
form of compromise
there, and we can make some
headway and get
this country off its stagnation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly to
the other two
of you.
Lee Ann Colacioppo, hopes for
this administration
from your people in your area?
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO: I hear a lot
of -- very
similar to what he was just
saying, I hear
a lot of people just wishing
that the nasty
tone would come down and that
there wouldn't
just be a stalemate in Congress,
and that
they would all be able to work
together to
get something done that would
incorporate
the thoughts of both parties,
compromise,
basically.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Haynes,
finally, in Milwaukee,
what are the hopes?
DAVID HAYNES: Well, I think one
of the hopes
right now is that the White
House can become
less chaotic and more
professional.
It really seems to be like
amateur hour right
now.
And for both conservatives and
independents
in our state, there is concern
that it's hard
to get anything done if there
isn't good leadership
coming from the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We want to thank
all three
of you for joining us.
Lee Ann Colacioppo, The Denver
Post, David
Bradley, The St. Joseph
News-Press in Missouri,
and David Haynes, The Milwaukee
Journal-Sentinel
in Wisconsin, we appreciate it.
LEE ANN COLACIOPPO: Thank you.
DAVID HAYNES: Thank you.
DAVID BRADLEY: Thank you.
Enjoyed it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
newly discovered
solar system sparks hope for
finding alien
life; and an industrial town
putting its hopes
in President Trump's promise to
revitalize
manufacturing.
But first: Nearly five million
Syrians have
fled their homeland for relative
safety in
surrounding Middle Eastern
countries.
Some hope to emigrate to Europe
and elsewhere,
and undergo processing at United
Nations'
centers throughout the region.
Those hoping to come to the U.S.
have an uncertain
future ahead of them, amid the
Trump administration's
orders on immigration.
From Jordan, special
correspondent Mike Cerre
reports.
MIKE CERRE: The long roads for
refugees hoping
to settle in the U.S. and other
countries
start at processing centers like
this one
in the region run by the U.N.
Refugee Agency,
UNHCR.
Always a tedious and emotional
process, recent
changes in U.S. immigration
policy added a
new level of anxiety for many
refugees, whose
final security screenings and
departure flights
were abruptly canceled, while
UNHCR officials
could sort out the implications
of the executive
order.
Paul Stromberg is the deputy
director of the
UNHCR refugee resettlement
immigration office
in Jordan.
PAUL STROMBERG, UNHCR: The
process doesn't
allow, really, to speed up or
slow down the
people who are traveling, have
completed this
very thorough screening process
that has lasted,
for each of them, between one
and two years.
For many families, the ones who
were about
to leave at the end of that very
extensive
process, had to be rebooked on
flights.
MIKE CERRE: After six years of
war, the nearly
five million Syrian refugees are
still living
within 200 miles of their homes
in neighboring
countries like here in Jordan,
Lebanon and
Turkey, with fewer options of
ever being able
to go back, or going forward, as
more Western
governments start closing their
immigration
doors.
But as we discovered along the
Turkey-Syria
border, settling in the U.S. has
rarely been
the refugees' first choice, for
geographic
and cultural reasons.
Most Syrian refugees have
preferred staying
close to their homeland and
relatives, rather
than immigrating to Europe, let
alone the
U.S.
RHANA, Social Worker: And, also,
they have
Syrian coffee here, and also the
trademark,
it's Syrian.
MIKE CERRE: Rhana, an English
literature professor
back in Syria, is now a social
worker, helping
her fellow Syrian refugees get
food and housing.
She believes many refugees'
cultural ties
to the region are holding them
back from going
to Europe as much as the
financial and legal
obstacles.
RHANA: It depends on the
mentality of Syrian
people.
For example, if they find jobs,
and they could
be able to afford living in
Turkey, I think
they will rather stay in Turkey.
They don't need to even exert
effort to learn
the language.
And they share a lot with the
Turkish people.
MIKE CERRE: With no end of the
war in sight,
neighboring host countries
closed their borders
with Syria last year.
The overwhelming strain on their
economies
and delays in foreign aid
pledges have forced
them to reduce social services,
prompting
more Syrian and Iraqi refugees
to choose the
immigration route, no matter how
long it takes.
PAUL STROMBERG: There are over
650,000 registered
Syrians in Jordan, almost 10
percent of the
population.
So, many would like to go to
other countries.
But, first of all, those spaces
have to be
made available.
They can't apply for them.
They don't get in line.
They don't come here and demand
anything.
But through spaces made
available by resettlement
countries, then we will go out
and check who
best suits those conditions.
MIKE CERRE: The U.S. has taken
far fewer Syrian
refugees per capita than the
other 30 resettlement
countries, fewer than 18,000,
compared to
Canada's nearly 40,000 and
Germany's more
than 600,000.
The U.S. also has an additional
vetting process
not required by the others.
PAUL STROMBERG: As a refugee,
you are dealing
with several different security
agencies,
different security databases,
biometric registration
at different checks, at
different points of
the process, face-to-face
interviews at different
points to verify what you are
telling authorities.
MIKE CERRE: Refuges stay abreast
of the latest
immigration developments on
local news channels
and through regular contact with
relatives
and friends already in the U.S.
This Syrian Kurdish refugee
family from Kobani
sold the last of their family
jewelry to pay
the rent for their apartment in
an unfinished
building they are living here
until they know
where their future will be.
MAN (through translator): God's
willing, if
Kobani is liberated, I will go
back.
I wish I can reach Kobani and
die there.
MIKE CERRE: Even if the
immigration ban is
permanently overturned or
substantially changed,
it's had a chilling effect on
many refugees,
who are now not sure if they
still want to
go to the U.S. if and when they
get another
chance.
For the "PBS NewsHour," Mike
Cerre reporting
from Amman, Jordan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to this
week's edition
of Leading Edge.
There is new excitement tonight
about the
search for possible life in a
solar system
beyond our own.
Astronomers have identified
seven Earth-sized
planets orbiting a star just a
mere 230 trillion
miles or so from our own planet.
That sounds like a mind-boggling
distance.
It is.
But researchers say the idea of
life on one
of these exoplanets, as they're
called, is
tantalizing.
Astronomers, using ground and
space telescopes
operated by NASA and the
European Southern
Observatory, made the
announcement.
Our own Miles O'Brien is here to
guide us
through the news.
First of all, if something is so
far away
-- this is maybe a basic science
question
-- how do we know what we know
and what we
saw?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's a good
question.
You know, think about it for a
minute.
If it's trillions of miles away,
how is it
even possible?
So, imagine -- the technique is
called transit
photometry.
Now, imagine you're about a mile
away from
a headlight and a mosquito goes
across the
headlight.
Believe it not, that headlight
is slightly
dimmed by the fact that that
mosquito goes
across.
Well, this is tantamount to what
they do.
The planet goes in front of the
star, it dims
ever so slightly, and with a lot
of complicated
and sensitive instrumentation,
you can determine
that, in fact, that's a planet.
They discovered three of them
this way.
They said, hmm, this is an
interesting, ultra-cool
brown dwarf to look at.
Let's put some more hardware on
it.
They set more instrumentation on
And, sure enough, there ended up
to be seven
Earth-like planets, just about
the size and
mass of Earth, orbiting this
Jupiter-sized,
ultra-cool brown dwarf.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you say
ultra-cool,
that doesn't mean it's a cold
sun.
It's just not as big or as hot
as ours, right?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's about like
Jupiter is
to us, OK, cooler and smaller.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And when we
talk about this
habitable zone, this Goldilocks,
not too cold,
not too hot, how do they know
that there are
planets in this group that exist
within that
range?
MILES O'BRIEN: They can measure
the radiation
off of TRAPPIST-1, this
particular ultra-cool
brown dwarf, and figure out the
zone at which
water would remain liquid.
And that's the key.
Everywhere we look on this
planet and we find
liquid water, we find life.
It doesn't matter where we go.
So, in the hunt for potential
alien life,
the thought of finding places
where there
is liquid water is what really
intrigues scientists.
So, these planets are a lot
closer to TRAPPIST-1
than we are to our son, but,
remember, it's
smaller and dimmer.
And they have these very tight
little orbits.
And it's quite likely there
might be water
on some of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, even with
just a few
weeks that we have been watching
this particular
system, what do we know about
what it would
be like to stand on one of these
perhaps rocky,
inhabitable planets?
MILES O'BRIEN: It would be a
very interesting
place.
For one thing, we believe they
are tidal-locked,
which means -- it's like our
moon facing us.
We only see one side of the moon
as it orbits
around.
These planets face their star
all the time.
So you have got a sunny side and
you have
got a nighttime side.
So, if you're buying real
estate, I would
go on the sunny side of one of
these planets,
for sure.
(LAUGHTER)
MILES O'BRIEN: If you were to
stand there,
you would see probably kind of
almost perpetual
sunset kind of idea.
And these other planets would be
perhaps larger
than our moon in the sky.
It would be a very interesting
place to be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it
wouldn't take 365
days to go around.
These things are spinning
around...
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right?
MILES O'BRIEN: No, no, the one
closest in
is about a day-and-a-half
around.
The one farthest out, they think
about 20
days.
So, if you are going to live out
there, you
are going to get old quickly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, this is
just the first
little look that we had.
And scientists love to start to
point every
other piece of technology they
have.
What do we hope to learn with
perhaps the
satellites that are coming up?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, exoplanet
researchers
are very excited about this.
As a matter of fact, they're
deploying existing
instrumentation on it.
Let's listen briefly to Sara
Seager, who is
an exoplanet researcher at MIT.
SARA SEAGER, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology:
The great news is we can observe
in the near
future.
We no longer have to rely on
what we think
and speculation, because nature
usually is
smarter we are.
And if there is any way for life
to get a
foothold, we like to believe it
will.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is like
the Super Bowl
for exoplanet researchers.
Right?
MILES O'BRIEN: It is indeed.
And we're looking ahead toward a
big improvement
in the space-based telescope
capability.
The James Webb Space Telescope,
long delayed,
overbudget NASA project, is
finally slated
for launch in October of 2018.
It will have spectroscopy
equipment on it,
which means it will be able to
analyze the
atmosphere of these planets and
identify some
of the key building blocks of
life, whether
it's oxygen, or hydrogen, or
methane or carbon,
and make some determination as
to whether
it is even more likely that
there is potential
life on some of these planets.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Miles O'Brien,
thanks for joining us.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our series
on the economic
concerns of Trump voters in a
few hard-hit
areas of the country.
This week, we're listening to
them describe
their hopes for Mr. Trump now
that he is president.
Jeffrey Brown is here with more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Our colleagues at
"Frontline"
traveled to regions that once
voted Democratic,
but voted for Donald Trump in
this election.
Last night, we heard from miners
in West Virginia
coal country.
Tonight, a profile of a couple
in Erie County,
Pennsylvania.
It's part of How the Deck Is
Stacked, the
"NewsHour"'s collaboration with
"Frontline"
and marketplace, in conjunction
with the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting.
JOE ORENGIA, Owner, Joe's Gym:
OK.
I'm Joe Orengia, and this is my
business,
Joe's Gym, Erie, Pennsylvania,
current world
champion.
I'm a veteran, I'm on Social
Security, and
I'm a businessman.
I have been undefeated world
champion since
1993.
I teach people how to get their
life back.
The only way you're going to get
your life
back is to get your strength
back.
I want to see Erie the way it
used to be.
We have got to get our
manufacturing back.
For the sake of my children and
grandchildren,
I hope something happens.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
So, Erie has lost nearly one in
three manufacturing
jobs.
You know that.
All you do.
I flew over.
You're looking at the plants,
but you see
them.
They're falling over, the rain,
the sleet,
the snow, the wind.
These are great buildings that
are falling
apart.
These are great buildings that
are falling
apart.
I promise, we can fix it so
fast.
We're going to bring it back.
We're going to bring back our
jobs.
companies.
JOE ORENGIA: Fifties and '60s,
when I was
a kid, it was awesome.
My dad raised seven of us kids,
as a coal
miner, worked his butt off.
They moved up here when I was 1
years-old
to go to work at G.E.
My brothers and my nephews, they
all worked
at G.E.
They wanted me to go down to
G.E., but I said,
I like this physical stuff,
because I was
a bridge builder, ironworker and
bridge builder,
at Local 348 union.
I was one of their best
climbers, so I always
got the job of putting the
buildings together,
which was fun.
You climb up the column, big
piece of steel
comes up.
You bolt it up.
You walk out, unhook the cable
and stand there
and wait for the next piece.
Everybody had good jobs.
Everybody had good-paying jobs.
I need a car, I had the money to
go buy one.
I was making my house payments,
feeding the
family.
Even when I when I retired from
the ironwork,
I didn't have to retire.
They didn't want me to retire.
I says, I want to run a gym.
I want to get my gym going.
I put up the big buildings for
the Hammermill
Paper Company, 10-story
buildings in Erie.
I put them up.
I was a connector.
I put these -- ah, I would have
fun.
I loved it.
They're gone.
And the people are gone.
It seems like, about the last 15
years, things
have really sucked, because a
lot of people
are leaving the area because the
manufacturing
jobs have left.
There's no work.
And I used to see all these guys
walking down
the street with their lunch
bucket in their
hand going to work.
Now you see them walking down
the street with
food stamps.
I had a lot of members here from
G.E.
I don't anymore.
I think I have two.
A lot of them left Erie.
They're not even around Erie
anymore.
My wife runs a business.
She owns Custom Audio, right up
the road here.
The minimum I put in here is
eight hours a
day.
Last night, I was here 14 hours.
My wife puts in a minimum of 60
hours a week,
and sometimes 80.
We have to.
SONDRALEE ORENGIA, Owner, Custom
Audio: So,
I'm Sondralee Orengia.
I have owned an electronics
store for 33 years.
And a couple of years ago, I
really cut back
on the staff.
And we're just -- we're really
lean right
now, and I think a lot of
business owners
are treating their businesses
that way.
What's happening to Erie is,
G.E. is transitioning
down to Texas and Mexico.
So those really good-paying jobs
will be leaving.
Some of the other shops can't
afford those
higher-paying jobs.
They can pay well, but not as
well as what
some of the other workers, you
know, at G.E.
are used to.
JOE ORENGIA: I love people, all
kinds of people.
I want to see the American
patriots, the American
people that love this country,
be happy and
healthy.
When your health goes, this
goes.
I have been knocked down
thousands of times
in my life in everything I have
done, and
I came back stronger than ever.
I was actually a Democrat way
back, because
my family was, back when
Democrats made more
I was actually a Democrat way
back, because
my family was, back when
Democrats made more
sense to me.
SONDRALEE ORENGIA: The
Democratic Party's
so strong here, and then you get
someone like
Donald Trump who is really a
very different
candidate.
I mean, we have never seen
anything like him
before, and I think that scares
people.
But I think the people who voted
for him,
they are hopeful.
JOE ORENGIA: So that night,
during the election,
I sat up until the local news
came on.
He won Erie, which has not been
won by a Republican
since the '80s.
If things get a little even just
a little
bit better, OK, let's give him
another four
years, because maybe they will
get a little
bit more better.
If things get worse, no.
I have got to give him a chance.
But I'm still probably going to
go back to
independent because I don't --
still don't
agree with a lot of either one
of them.
And I have my own ideas, and I
try to go with
the best person, not the best
party.
JEFFREY BROWN: We asked two
economists who've
served in past administrations
to watch these
reports.
Douglas Holtz-Eakin served in
the George W.
Bush administration.
He's now with the American
Action Forum.
And Jared Bernstein worked for
Vice President
Biden.
He's now at the Center on Budget
and Policy
Priorities.
Welcome to both of you.
Jared, let me start with you.
There's no denying the problem
that we just
saw.
What struck you watching these
videos?
JARED BERNSTEIN, Former Chief
Economist to
Vice President Joe Biden: I saw
considerable
despair, but I also heard a
great deal of
hope there.
And it was a kind of hope that
has been very
much amped up by Donald Trump's
rhetoric around
the campaign, the kind of jobs
and sectors
he's arguing that he can bring
back to those
communities.
And, man, they really need those
jobs and
sectors.
My concern, my fear, really, is
that he can't
deliver on that hope.
And despair met with hope that
doesn't end
up being delivered, that's a
problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, let
get a first
impression from Douglas
Holtz-Eakin.
What did you see?
What did you hear?
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, Former
Congressional
Budget Office Director: Well, I
think a lot
of the things Jared heard.
Number one, this is -- these are
stories of
great distress.
That's real.
It's palpable, and unmistakable.
There is also a longing for a
past that it's
not realistic to expect to
return.
Erie, Pennsylvania, is close to
my hometown.
It's no longer the
transportation hub it was
when we had the Erie Canal and
water transportation
as the central part of the U.S.
economy.
And coal is not the same in the
presence of
Western coal that competes with
it or natural
gas that competes with it.
So, a realistic assessment talks
about, what
can their future be, not what
was their past?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that -- so,
Doug, start
with that.
Help us think about what a
president can do
and look at some of the things
Donald Trump
is talking about, at least, tax
reform, for
example, tax cuts.
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: I think
there is an enormous
amount that the president can do
on tax reform.
We have a tax code that, broadly
speaking,
favors foreign production over
domestic production.
A good reform would neutralize
that and shift
things back to the U.S. when
they're driven
offshore by taxes.
That would a great step.
That doesn't mean they will land
in Erie or
that doesn't mean they will land
in coal country,
but it's something that should
be done.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Jared,
would those kinds
of things have an impact on the
workers we
saw?
JARED BERNSTEIN: Perhaps at the
margin, but
I think we put way too much
weight on tax
reform as economists.
We have had very different tax
regimes while
globalization has been ongoing,
and you have
seen what's happened in these
communities.
So I don't think we can count on
tweaks in
the tax code -- and Doug and I
could probably
agree on some very good ones,
because the
tax code is pretty messed up --
and hope that
this globalization toothpaste
will somehow
go back in the tube, which is
what I hear
Donald Trump promising.
And I agree with Doug.
What needs to happen is that
these communities
have to adapt to globalization,
which doesn't
mean you can get back jobs that
aren't coming
back.
But it does mean that you can
make a play
for advanced manufacturing, for
new industries,
for new types of energy.
I don't hear that coming out of
this administration.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about -- one
thing you
do here is pushing individual
companies to
stay, right, to not move jobs
offshore.
JARED BERNSTEIN: Yes.
Well, that's mostly public
relations.
That's not a systematic economic
plan.
Now, frankly, I kind of like
when the president
takes the bully pulpit and says,
we want you
to keep jobs here.
That's kind of old-school.
But it resonates with me.
But it's not...
JEFFREY BROWN: That could be
old-school liberal,
right?
JARED BERNSTEIN: Yes, but it's
not an economic
plan.
It's not a systematic strategy
that will help
deliver the goods to the kinds
of communities
we're talking about.
JEFFREY BROWN: Doug, Doug
Holtz-Eakin, what
do you think about that kind of
move and -- that
kind of move?
And then there's also the
deregulation that
he talks about.
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: I think the
bully pulpit
is fine, but businesses follow
economic incentives.
And once you give them a good
chastising,
the economic incentives are
still the same.
And unless you change them, over
the long
haul, the results will be the
same.
So, the bully pulpit is great,
but following
through and actually changing
the incentives
they have and the kinds of
things that get
produced in these communities is
the key.
And I think that taking a good,
hard look
at the regulatory state makes
sense.
We have seen a dramatic decline
in the startup
of new businesses in the United
States.
It's something that's happened
across sectors.
It's not just in manufacturing
or just in
retail.
And so there's something going
on there.
And we know that, when you start
new businesses,
that's when you get the job
growth, that's
when you get the new
opportunities.
And that's something that I
think any administration
should look closely at.
JEFFREY BROWN: What is the -- I
think, Jared,
you brought up the word hope,
which you heard
from these people.
We heard the woman in Erie say
people who
voted for him, Donald Trump,
they're hopeful.
How important is the
psychological factor?
JARED BERNSTEIN: Well, I think
it's important,
but I also think it's
omnipresent.
I have been to places like this.
And you constantly run into
folks like that
who really have hope for the
future.
And what it is, is that they
want to participate
in the economy.
Structural changes,
globalization, these kinds
of -- the loss of the unions,
the kind of
labor standards kind of eroding,
they have
really hurt these folks.
And what they would like is a
chance to ply
their trade.
Like the guy who says, I'm a
hard worker and
hard work is good, that --
again, that resonated
with me, but he doesn't have the
employment
opportunity.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
JARED BERNSTEIN: So, what we
really ought
to be talking about is how he's
going to get
that.
One idea is infrastructure.
You can look at those films, and
you see these
places really need some
infrastructure.
Now, this is something that the
Trump administration
has talked about, but it doesn't
seem to be
getting anywhere.
And that's a concern of mine.
JEFFREY BROWN: What's a
particular thing that,
if you could wave your magic
wand, Doug, that
you would like to see?
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: Well, look,
the reality
is this.
You can only have the
infrastructure if you
have businesses that are going
to use it.
And so that becomes an issue.
The reality is that, in the
manufacturing
sector, it's been automation.
It takes 10 percent of the
workers that it
used to, to create the same
things in the
U.S. and export them.
And so there are fewer
opportunities.
So, you need to be the worker
who can take
advantage of those
opportunities.
It is unsurprising that people
with a college
degree have an unemployment rate
of 2.5 percent.
That's the magic elixir in this
economy.
And these communities have too
many people
who have not had the educational
foundation
to take advantage of that.
And we're missing the programs
that get people
who want to work hard, but do
not have the
skills up to speed.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, go ahead,
Jared.
JARED BERNSTEIN: So, here I have
-- kind of
flip the politics a bit.
I'm completely for people being
able to get
all the skills they can.
But if you -- you can get be all
educated
and still not have a job that
will suffice
for you in your community.
And so here is where I think
Donald Trump
has said something important and
useful.
And it's not just about
education or infrastructure.
It's about trade.
It's actually the case.
He's right that these
communities have been
hurt by our large and persistent
trade deficits.
And so we need to take steps to
reduce those
as well.
Again, I don't hear them really
talking about
it, other than some tariffs,
which are bad
ideas.
But there are good ways to do
that also.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK, Doug
Holtz-Eakin, a last
word here from you?
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: I think the
trade piece
is vastly overblown.
I don't think that's the source
of their problems.
If you look at the -- even the
tape on Erie,
their problems began in the
'70s, well before
we saw NAFTA, well before we saw
the famed
entry of China into the WTO.
These are deep, structural
trends in the economy.
These are places that had
valuable resources,
coal and transportation access,
that no longer
have those as their economic
playing card.
They need to create a new one,
or the people
who stay there simply aren't
going to have
an opportunity.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Douglas Holtz-Eakin,
Jared Bernstein, thank you both
very much.
JARED BERNSTEIN: Thank you.
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for a look at
the extended-length
videos in this series, Betting
on Trump, go
to the "NewsHour" Web site.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
The Trump administration today
announced that
it would soon make a major
change regarding
the contentious issue of
transgender youth
and which bathrooms they use at
school.
William Brangham has that story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Department
of Justice
and Education are expected to
roll back Obama-era
guidance that advises schools to
let transgender
kids use the bathroom that
corresponds with
their gender identity, not
necessarily the
gender they were born with.
But if that guidance goes away,
what does
this mean for schools?
Evie Blad from Education Week is
back to help
us sort it all out.
Welcome back.
EVIE BLAD, Education Week: Thank
you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's do
this chronologically.
Last year, the Obama
administration put out
these guidelines.
They said, if you, schools, have
transgender
students in your schools, let
them use the
bathrooms that correspond with
their gender
identity.
What's the rationale for that
argument?
EVIE BLAD: Well, the Obama
administration
argued that the sex
discrimination protections
in Title IX, the federal law,
applied to gender
identity, rather than merely
biological sex.
And they had heard from many
districts and
states and some educational
groups that there
was a lack of clarity at the
state and local
level.
And so they put out this federal
civil rights
guidance to say, not only do you
have to allow
these children access to
facilities that match
their gender identity.
You have to respect that on
forms.
You have to provide a safe
learning environment
free from bullying based on this
identity.
And you cannot disclose their
transgender
status if they don't want it to
be disclosed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now, a lot of
states welcomed
this guidance and said they were
already doing
those sort of practices.
A lot of states resisted.
About a dozen or so sued.
What was their argument against
this guidance?
EVIE BLAD: Right.
Well, so there is actually two
big multistate
lawsuits.
So, more than 20 states are
litigating the
issue.
Their argument are -- several
things.
Some made a student privacy
argument, suggesting
that it violated the privacy of
students who
aren't transgender to share
facilities with
students who are.
And some made a states' rights
claim this
was federal overreach and an
abuse of the
power of the department, that
they weren't
actually interpreting federal
law, but rather
creating new policy through a
back door.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if, as we
expect, the
Trump administration to pull
back this guidance,
what does that mean tomorrow or
next week
if I'm a transgender kid in a
school somewhere
in the country?
What does it mean for me?
EVIE BLAD: Well, about 15 states
have anti-discrimination
laws that cover transgender
students.
So students in those states,
their reality
would remain the same.
And there are districts around
the country
that have made the decision on
their own,
long before this guidance, to
put rules in
place that largely mirror what
it requires.
But for states and districts
that don't have
those kinds of rules, they're
kind of on their
own to interpret the federal law
and to make
their own determination on what
they think
they should do for these
children.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Of course,
this is all happening
in the backdrop of a very big
Supreme Court
case that is happening where a
boy in Virginia,
a transgender boy, sued his
school district
to say, let me use the boys'
bathroom.
Does the withdrawal of these
guidelines do
anything to his standing in the
Supreme Court?
EVIE BLAD: Well, to this point,
many transgender
students who have won in federal
courts have
won under the argument that the
courts should
defer to federal interpretation
of Title IX.
And so that does take one
argument away.
But Gavin Grimm, the student
from Virginia,
can still go forward, his
attorneys say, arguing
about the fundamental meaning of
Title IX,
what was implied when it was
written, and
should that apply to him today?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
arguments that
undergirds a lot of this, I
know, is the fear
that some people have expressed
that, if you
allow a transgender student to
use the bathroom
according to their gender
identity, that you
might have men masquerading as
women, in effect,
to get into a bathroom and
somehow get up
to no good.
Is there any evidence that
that's really something
that's going on?
EVIE BLAD: I don't believe so.
In the districts that have had
these rules
for a long time, they say that
they have had
very little problems with them.
They say that students' requests
to use them
are pretty rare.
The most recent estimate on
transgender students
said that transgender children
between the
ages of 13 and 17, they make up
about 0.7
percent of the population.
So we're talking about a very
small number
of students here.
But there is some argument on
the other side
that it can be difficult to
implement and
interpret these rules for such a
confusing
thing as gender identity,
especially when
it can be in flux for some
children.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Evie Blad of
Education Week, thanks so much.
EVIE BLAD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: a conversation with a
photographer who
captures the theater of American
political
life, from campaign rallies to
protests.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tune in later
tonight on
Charlie Rose: Ambassador Omar
Ghobash of the
United Arab Emirates and his
advice to young
moderate Muslims on how to
navigate the world.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.